the senator from Oregon mr. president
the United States Senate is preparing to
pass another four-year extension of the
USA PATRIOT Act I've served on the
Intelligence Committee for over a decade
and I want to deliver a warning this
afternoon when the American people find
out how their government has secretly
interpreted the Patriot Act they are
going to be stunned and they are going
to be angry and they're gonna ask
senators did you know what this law
actually permits why didn't you know
before you voted on it the fact is
anyone can read the plain text of the
Patriot Act and yet many members of
Congress have no idea how the law is
being secretly interpreted by the
executive branch because that
interpretation is classified it's almost
as if there were two Patriot Act's and
many many members of Congress have not
read the one that matters our
constituents of course are totally in
the dark members of the public have no
access to the secret legal
interpretations so they have no idea
what their government believes the law
actually means and I'm going to bring up
several historical examples to try to
demonstrate what this is meant over the
years before I begin I want to be clear
that I'm not claiming that any of the
specific activities I discussed today
are happening now I'm bringing them up
because I believe they are a reminder of
how the American people react when they
learn about domestic surveillance
activities that are not consistent with
what they believe the law allows when
Americans learn about intelligence
activities that are consistent with
their understanding of the law of they
look to the news media they follow these
activities with interest and often
admiration but when people learn about
intelligence activities that are outside
the lines of what is generally thought
to be the law the reaction can get
negative and get negative in a hurry so
here's my first example the CIA was
established by the National Security Act
of 1947 and the law stated that the
agency was quote forbidden to have law
enforcement powers or internal security
functions members of the Congress legal
experts interpreted that language is a
clear prohibition against any Internal
Security function under any
circumstances a group of CIA officials
had a different interpretation they
decided that the 1947 law contained
legal gray areas that allowed the CIA to
monitor American citizens for possible
contact with foreign agents they
believed this meant that they could
secretly tap Americans phones open their
mail and plant listening devices in
their homes among other things the
secret legal interpretation led the CIA
to maintain intelligence files on more
than 10,000 American citizens including
reporters members of Congress and a host
of anti-war activists the small group of
CIA officials kept the program and their
quote gray area justification of the
program a secret from the American
people and most of the government
because they argued revealing it would
violate the agencies responsible
responsibility to protect intelligence
sources and methods from unauthorized
disclosure did the program stay a secret
mr. president it didn't and on December
22nd 1974 investigative reporter Seymour
Hersh detailed the program on the front
pages of the New York Times the
revelations and the huge public uproar
that ensued led to the formation of the
church committee that committee spent
nearly two years investigating
questionable and illegal activity at the
CIA the Church Committee published
fourteen reports detailing various
intelligence abuses which in addition to
illegal domestic surveillance included
programs designed to assassin
eight foreign leaders the investigation
led to executive orders reining in the
authority of the CIA and the creation of
the House and Senate intelligence
committees in 1947 President Harry
Truman and his top military and legal
advisers secretly approved a program
named Project Shamrock Project shamrock
authorized the Armed Forces security
agency and its successor the NSA to
monitor Telegraph's coming in and out of
the United States at the outset of the
program companies were told that
government agents would only read quote
those telegrams related to foreign
intelligence targets but as the program
grow more telegrams were sent and
received by Americans and they were read
during the program's 30-year run the NSA
analysts sometimes reviewed as many as a
hundred and fifty thousand telegrams a
month while the Ford administration said
that it made all pertinent information
about Project shamrock available to the
Senate Intelligence Committee and the
Justice Department it kept the program
secret from the public they argued that
public disclosure was both unjustified
and dangerous to national security and
it avoided Congress questions regarding
the legality of the program by stating
that the telegrams present somewhat
different legal questions from those
posed by domestic bugging and
wiretapping
and that program didn't stay secret
either the newly formed Senate
Intelligence Committee ultimately
disclosed the project shamrock program
on November 6 1975 arguing that public
disclosure was needed to build support
build support for a law governing NSA
operations that resulting public uproar
led to a congressional investigation the
NSA's termination of project shamrock
and the passage of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978
which attempted to subject domestic
surveillance to a process of warrants
and judicial review
years later during the Reagan
administration senior members of the
National Security Council secretly sold
arms to Iran and use the funds to armed
and trained contra militants to topple
the Nicaraguan government selling arms
to Iran violated the official US arms
embargo against Iran and directly
funding the Contras was illegal under
the Boland Amendment that was the one
Congress passed the limit US government
assistance to the Contras but the
officials at the National Security
Council were convinced they knew better
they were convinced that violating the
embargo and illegally supporting the
Contra rebels would help free American
hostages and help fight communism in
Nicaragua instead of engaging in a
public debate and trying to convince the
Congress and the public they were right
they secretly launched an arms program
and hid it from the Congress and the
American people now how did that work
out for them now the New York Times
published the story of these activities
on November 25th 1986 the joint
congressional committee was launched to
investigate the iran-contra affair with
televised hearings for over a month the
House Foreign Affairs Committee and the
House and Senate intelligence committees
held their own hearings the first
presidential commission investigating
the National Security Council was
launched multiple reports were published
documenting the administration's illegal
activities and the Nicaraguan government
sued the United States
dozens of court cases were filed in
national security council officials
including new national security advisors
faced multiple indictments now finally
following the terrorist acts of
September 11th 2001 a handful of
government officials made the unilateral
judgment that following US surveillance
law as it was commonly understood would
slow down the government's ability to
track suspected terrorists instead of
working with the Congress instead of
coming to the Congress
and asking to revise or update the law
these officials secretly reinterpreted
the law to justify a warrantless
wiretapping program that they hid from
virtually every member of the Congress
and the American people it's not clear
how long they thought they could hide a
large controversial national security
program of this nature but they kept it
so secret that even when it yielded
useful intelligence classification
restrictions sometimes prevented the
information from being shared with
officials who could have used it I was a
member of the Senate Intelligence
Committee at this point a relatively new
member at the program and the legal
interpretations that supported it were
kept secret from me and virtually all of
my colleagues again did that program
stay secret the answer is no mr.
president after several years the New
York Times published a story uncovering
the program the resulting public uproar
led to a divisive congressional debate
and a significant number of losses in my
view the disclosure also led to an
erosion of public trust that made many
private companies more reluctant to
cooperate with government inquiries as
most of my colleagues will remember
Congress in the executive branch spent
years trying to sort out the details of
that particular program and the secret
legal interpretation the secret legal
interpretation that was used to justify
it in the process of doing so Congress
also attempted to address some actual
surveillance policy issues I think
almost all of my colleagues who are here
for that debate would agree that those
issues could have been resolved far more
easily far less contentiously
if the Bush administration had simply
come to the Congress in the first place
and tried to work out a bipartisan
solution to them rather than in effect
trying to rewrite the law in secret when
laws are secretly reinterpreted this way
the results freak
Lys fails to stand up to public scrutiny
and it's not surprising if you think
about it the American lawmaking process
is often cumbersome here it's often
frustrating and it's certainly
contentious but over the long run this
process is a pretty good way to ensure
that our laws have the support of the
American people since those that don't
will actually get revised or repealed by
elected lawmakers who follow the will of
our constituents on the other hand when
laws are secretly reinterpreted behind
closed doors by a small number of
government officials and there's no
public scrutiny no public debate you're
certainly more likely to end up with
interpretations of the law that go well
beyond the boundaries of what the
American people are willing to accept
now let me make clear that I think it's
entirely legitimate for government
agencies to keep some information secret
in a democratic society of course
citizens rightly expect that government
will not arbitrarily keep information
from them and throughout our nation's
history
Americans have vigilantly guaranteed
their right to know but Americans do
acknowledge certain limited exceptions
to the principle of openness we know for
example that tax officials have
information about all of us from our tax
returns but the government doesn't have
the right or the need to share this
information openly this is essentially
an exception to protect personal privacy
another limited exception exists for the
protection of national security the US
government has an inherent
responsibility to protect our people
from threats and to do this effectively
it almost always requires some measure
of secrecy I don't expect General
Petraeus to publicly discuss the details
of every troop movement in Afghanistan
any more than early Americans expected
George Washington to publish his
strategy for the Battle of Yorktown by
the same token American citizens
recognized their government may
sometimes rely on secret intelligence
collection methods in order to ensure
Nash
security in order to ensure the safety
of the American people and they
recognize that these methods can often
be more effective when specifics are
kept secret but while Americans
recognize that government agencies
sometimes rely on secret sources and
methods to collect intelligence
information Americans also expect that
these agencies will cooperate at all
times within the boundaries of publicly
understood lawn
now I have served on the Senate
Intelligence Committee for a decade and
I don't take a back seat to anybody when
it comes to protecting what are
essential sources and methods that are
needed to keep the American people safe
when intelligence is being gathered but
I don't believe the law should ever be
kept secret voters have a right and a
need to know what the law says and what
their government thinks the text of the
law means and that's essential so the
American people can decide whether the
law is appropriately written and they're
in a position to ratify or reject the
decisions their elected officials make
on their behalf when it comes to most
government functions the public can
directly observe the government's
actions and the typical citizen can
decide for themselves whether they
support or agree with the things that
their government is doing certainly in
my part of the world American citizens
can visit the national forests and
decide whether they think the forests
are appropriately managed when they
drive on the interstate they can decide
for themselves whether those highways
have been properly laid out and
adequately maintained if they see
someone punished they can decide for
themselves whether the sentence was
appropriate whether it was too harsh or
too lenient but Americans generally
can't decide for themselves whether
intelligence agencies are operating
within the law or not that's why the US
intelligence community evolved over the
past several decades the Congress set up
a number of watchdog and oversight
mechanisms to ensure that the
intelligence agencies followed the law
rather than violated that's why the
Senate and House each have
a select Intelligence Committee it's
also why the Congress created the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
and it's why Congress created a number
of statutory inspectors general to act
as independent watchdogs inside the
intelligence agencies themselves all of
these oversight entities were created at
least in part to ensure that
intelligence agencies carry out all of
their activities within the boundaries
of publicly understood law but the law
itself must always be public government
officials must not be allowed to fall
into the trap of secretly reinterpreting
the law in a way that creates a gap
between what the public believes the law
says and what the government secretly
claims it says any time that happens it
seems to me there's going to be a
violation of the public trust
furthermore allowing a gap of this
nature to develop is simply
short-sighted both history and logic
should make it clear and that's why I
brought these examples to the floor of
the Senate today that secret
interpretations of the law will not stay
secret forever and in fact often come to
light pretty quickly when the public
eventually finds out that government
agencies have been rewriting
surveillance law and secret the result
as I've demonstrated is invariably a
backlash and you and an erosion of
public confidence in these government
agencies mr. president I believe that
this is a big and growing problem now
our intelligence national security
agencies are staffed by many talented
and dedicated men and women the work
they do is very important and for the
most part they are extraordinarily
professional but when members of the
public lose confidence in these agencies
it just doesn't undercut morale it makes
it harder for these agencies to do their
if you ask the head of any Intelligence
Agency particularly an agency that is
involved in domestic surveillance in any
kind of way he or she will tell you that
public trust is the coin of the realm it
is a vital commodity and voluntary
cooperation from law-abiding Americans
is just critical to the effectiveness of
our intelligence agencies the members of
the public lose confidence in these
government agencies because they think
government officials are rewriting
surveillance law in secret it is gonna
make those agencies less effective and
as a member of the Intelligence
Committee I don't want to see that
happen I want to wrap up now with just
one last comment and that is that as you
look at these you know statutes and
particularly the ones that I've outlined
where you have so many hard-working
lawyers and officials at these
government agencies I want to make it
clear that I don't believe that these
officials have a malicious intent they
are working hard to protect intelligence
sources of meth and methods and for good
reasons but sometimes they can lose
sight of the differences between the
sources and methods which must be kept
secret and the law itself which should
not sometimes even go so far as to argue
that keeping their interpretation of the
law secret is actually necessary because
it prevents our nation's adversaries
from figuring out what our intelligence
agencies are allowed to do now I can see
how it might be tempting to latch on to
this Alice in Wonderland logic but if
the US government did were to actually
adopt it then all of our surveillance
laws would be kept secret because that
would obviously be even more useful when
Congress passed the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act in 1978 it would have
been useful to keep that law secret from
the KGB so that Soviet agents wouldn't
know whether the FBI was allowed to
but American laws shouldn't be public
only when government officials think
it's convenient they ought to be public
and public all the time and the American
people ought to be able to find out what
their government thinks those laws mean
now hourly er this week mr. president I
filed an amendment along with my
colleague from the Intelligence
Committee senator mark Udall and that
amendment would require the Attorney
General to publicly disclose the United
States government official
interpretation of the USA PATRIOT Act
the amendment specifically states the
Attorney General should not prescribe
any particular it should not describe
any particular intelligence collection
programs or activities but that there
should be a full description of the
legal interpretation and analysis
necessary to understand the government's
official interpretation of the law now
this morning senator Udall and I had the
help of Senator several colleagues
senator Merkley senator Tom Udall we
reached an agreement with the chair of
the Intelligence Committee senator
Feinstein she's going to be holding
hearings on this issue next month
senator Udall and I as members of the
committee will be in a position to go
into those hearings and the subsequent
deliberations be in a position to try to
amend the intelligence Authorization and
if we don't get results inside the
committee because of the agreement today
with the distinguished chair of the
Intelligence Committee senator Feinstein
majority leader Senator Reid we will be
in a position to come back to this floor
and offer our original amendment this
fall now we're going to keep fighting
for openness and honesty as of today the
government's official interpretation of
the law is still secret still secret mr.
president and I believe that there is a
growing gap as of this afternoon
between what the public believes
that law says and the secret
interpretation of the Justice Department
so I plan to vote no this afternoon on
this legislation because I said some
time ago that a long-term
reauthorization of this legislation did
require significant reforms and I
believe that when more members of
Congress and the American people come to
understand how the Patriot Act has
actually been interpreted in secret I
think the number of Americans who
support significant reform and the end
of secret law the end of law that is
kept secret from them by design I think
we will see Americans joining us in this
cause to ensure that in the days ahead
as we protect our country from the
dangerous threats that we face we are
also doing a better job of being
sensitive to individual liberty those
philosophies those critical principles
are what this country is all about
and we are going to stay at it senator
Udall and I and and others until those
changes are secured it's the president
with that I yield the floor